stage-2-mcp-server/README.md, before:

# Stage 2: MCP Server

## Overview

This stage introduces the **Model Context Protocol (MCP)**, a standardized protocol for connecting AI applications with external tools and data sources. You'll learn how to expose tools through MCP, making them accessible to any MCP-compatible client.

**Workshop Time**: 40 minutes (13:40-14:20)

## What You'll Learn

1. **MCP Protocol Fundamentals**
   - JSON-RPC 2.0 over STDIO
   - MCP initialization handshake
   - Tool discovery and execution
   - MCP message format

2. **Building an MCP Server**
   - Implementing the MCP protocol
   - Exposing tools via standard interface
   - Handling JSON-RPC requests
   - Returning structured responses

3. **Tool Integration**
   - Converting existing tools to MCP format
   - JSON schema for parameter validation
   - Error handling in MCP context

4. **Testing with MCP Clients**
   - Using the MCP Inspector
   - Integrating with Claude Desktop
   - Understanding client-server communication

## Key Concepts

### Model Context Protocol (MCP)

MCP is an open protocol that standardizes how applications provide context to Large Language Models (LLMs). It enables:

- **Interoperability**: Any MCP client can connect to any MCP server
- **Tool Discovery**: Clients can automatically discover available tools
- **Standardized Communication**: JSON-RPC 2.0 ensures consistent messaging
- **Type Safety**: JSON Schema validates tool parameters

### Architecture

```
┌─────────────────┐         JSON-RPC 2.0          ┌──────────────────┐
│   MCP Client    │◄──────── over STDIO ─────────►│   MCP Server     │
│  (Claude, etc)  │                                │  (Our Server)    │
└─────────────────┘                                └──────────────────┘
                                                            │
                                                            │ exposes
                                                            │
                                                            ▼
                                                   ┌──────────────────┐
                                                   │      Tools       │
                                                   │  - Weather       │
                                                   │  - Country Info  │
                                                   └──────────────────┘
```

### MCP Messages

**1. Initialize**
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": "1",
  "method": "initialize",
  "params": {
    "protocolVersion": "2024-11-05",
    "capabilities": {},
    "clientInfo": {
      "name": "example-client",
      "version": "1.0.0"
    }
  }
}
```

**2. List Tools**
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": "2",
  "method": "tools/list",
  "params": {}
}
```

**3. Call Tool**
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": "3",
  "method": "tools/call",
  "params": {
    "name": "weather",
    "arguments": {
      "city": "Paris"
    }
  }
}
```

## Project Structure

```
stage-2-mcp-server/
├── src/main/java/com/incept5/workshop/stage2/
│   ├── SimpleMCPServer.java     # MCP server implementation
│   ├── MCPDemo.java              # Demo application
│   └── tool/
│       ├── Tool.java             # Tool interface with JSON schema
│       ├── WeatherTool.java      # Weather tool implementation
│       └── CountryInfoTool.java  # Country info tool
├── pom.xml                       # Maven configuration
└── README.md                     # This file
```

## Running the Server

### Quick Start

```bash
# Build the project
cd stage-2-mcp-server
mvn clean package

# Run the server
java -jar target/stage-2-mcp-server.jar
```

### Testing with MCP Inspector

The MCP Inspector is a tool for testing MCP servers:

```bash
# Install and run the inspector (requires Node.js)
npx @modelcontextprotocol/inspector java -jar target/stage-2-mcp-server.jar
```

This will:
1. Start your MCP server
2. Open a web interface for testing
3. Allow you to call tools interactively

### Integrating with Claude Desktop

Add your server to Claude Desktop's configuration:

**macOS**: `~/Library/Application Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json`
**Windows**: `%APPDATA%\Claude\claude_desktop_config.json`

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "workshop-tools": {
      "command": "java",
      "args": [
        "-jar",
        "/absolute/path/to/stage-2-mcp-server.jar"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

Restart Claude Desktop, and your tools will be available!

## Implementation Details

### SimpleMCPServer

The server implements the core MCP protocol:

```java
public class SimpleMCPServer {
    private final Map<String, Tool> tools;
    
    // Registers tools
    public SimpleMCPServer() {
        registerTool(new WeatherTool());
        registerTool(new CountryInfoTool());
    }
    
    // Handles JSON-RPC requests
    private void handleRequest(String requestJson) {
        // Parse JSON-RPC request
        // Route to appropriate handler
        // Return JSON-RPC response
    }
    
    // Protocol methods
    private JsonObject handleInitialize(Object id, JsonObject params);
    private JsonObject handleToolsList(Object id);
    private JsonObject handleToolCall(Object id, JsonObject params);
}
```

### Tool Interface

Tools now include a JSON schema for parameter validation:

```java
public interface Tool {
    String getName();
    String getDescription();
    String getParameterSchema();  // New: JSON Schema for parameters
    String execute(Map<String, String> parameters) throws ToolExecutionException;
}
```

Example schema:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "city": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Name of the city"
    }
  },
  "required": ["city"]
}
```

## Exercises

### Exercise 1: Test the Server (5 minutes)

1. Build and run the server
2. Use the MCP Inspector to test it
3. Call the weather tool for different cities
4. Call the country_info tool

### Exercise 2: Add a New Tool (15 minutes)

Create a calculator tool that performs basic math operations:

```java
public class CalculatorTool implements Tool {
    @Override
    public String getName() {
        return "calculator";
    }
    
    @Override
    public String getDescription() {
        return "Performs basic math operations (add, subtract, multiply, divide)";
    }
    
    @Override
    public String getParameterSchema() {
        return """
            {
              "type": "object",
              "properties": {
                "operation": {
                  "type": "string",
                  "enum": ["add", "subtract", "multiply", "divide"],
                  "description": "The operation to perform"
                },
                "a": {
                  "type": "number",
                  "description": "First number"
                },
                "b": {
                  "type": "number",
                  "description": "Second number"
                }
              },
              "required": ["operation", "a", "b"]
            }
            """;
    }
    
    @Override
    public String execute(Map<String, String> parameters) 
            throws ToolExecutionException {
        // Implement the calculator logic
        // Parse numbers and perform operation
        // Return result
    }
}
```

**Tasks**:
1. Implement the calculator tool
2. Register it in SimpleMCPServer
3. Test it with the MCP Inspector

### Exercise 3: Integrate with Claude Desktop (10 minutes)

1. Configure Claude Desktop with your server
2. Restart Claude
3. Ask Claude to:
   - Get weather for your city
   - Get information about your country
   - Use your calculator tool

### Exercise 4: Understanding the Protocol (10 minutes)

Read through SimpleMCPServer.java and answer:

1. How does the server parse incoming JSON-RPC requests?
2. What's the structure of a tool list response?
3. How are tool results formatted?
4. How does error handling work?

## Comparison with Stage 1

| Aspect | Stage 1 | Stage 2 |
|--------|---------|---------|
| **Protocol** | Custom XML-like format | Standard JSON-RPC 2.0 |
| **Transport** | Direct method calls | STDIO (stdin/stdout) |
| **Discovery** | Hardcoded in prompt | Dynamic via tools/list |
| **Interop** | Agent-specific | Any MCP client |
| **Validation** | Manual parsing | JSON Schema |

## Key Takeaways

1. **MCP standardizes tool integration** - Any MCP client can use your tools
2. **JSON-RPC 2.0 provides structure** - Clear request/response format
3. **STDIO enables process isolation** - Server runs in separate process
4. **JSON Schema validates inputs** - Type-safe parameter passing
5. **Tool discovery is dynamic** - Clients learn about tools at runtime

## Next Steps

In Stage 3, we'll add:
- **RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation)** - Using PostgreSQL with pgvector
- **Document processing** - Chunking and embedding
- **Vector search** - Similarity-based retrieval

## Resources

- [MCP Specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs)
- [MCP Java SDK](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/java-sdk)
- [MCP Inspector](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/inspector)
- [Claude Desktop](https://claude.ai/download)
- [JSON-RPC 2.0 Specification](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification)
- [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/)

## Important: STDIO and Logging

### Critical Configuration

When using MCP over STDIO transport, **all logging MUST go to stderr, not stdout**. This is because:

1. **STDOUT is reserved for JSON-RPC messages** - The MCP protocol expects clean JSON on stdout
2. **Any non-JSON output breaks the protocol** - Log messages on stdout cause parse errors
3. **STDERR is for diagnostics** - All logging, errors, and debug output goes here

Our `logback.xml` configuration ensures this:

```xml
<appender name="STDERR" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
    <target>System.err</target>  <!-- ALL logs go to STDERR -->
    <encoder>
        <pattern>%d{HH:mm:ss.SSS} [%thread] %-5level %logger{36} - %msg%n</pattern>
    </encoder>
</appender>
```

**Common Error**: If you see errors like "Unexpected non-whitespace character after JSON", it means something is writing to stdout. Check:
- System.out.println() calls (remove or redirect to stderr)
- Logger configuration (must target stderr)
- Third-party libraries that may log to stdout

### NDJSON Format

MCP over STDIO uses **Newline Delimited JSON (NDJSON)**:
- Each JSON-RPC message must be on a single line
- Messages are separated by newlines
- No pretty-printing or multi-line formatting

This is why we use `new Gson()` instead of `new GsonBuilder().setPrettyPrinting().create()`.

## Troubleshooting

### Server won't start
- Check Java version (requires Java 21+)
- Verify the JAR was built: `mvn clean package`
- Check for port conflicts if using HTTP transport

### JSON parse errors in MCP Inspector
- **"Unexpected token '}'"** - Pretty-printing is enabled (should use compact JSON)
- **"Unexpected non-whitespace character"** - Logging is going to stdout (should go to stderr)
- **"Unexpected end of JSON"** - Incomplete JSON message (check for truncation)

### Tools not appearing in Claude
- Verify the config file path
- Check JSON syntax in claude_desktop_config.json
- Restart Claude Desktop completely
- Check Claude Desktop logs

### Tool execution fails
- Verify parameter names match the schema
- Check for network issues (weather/country APIs)
- Look at server logs (on stderr!) for detailed errors

### MCP Inspector issues
- Ensure Node.js is installed
- Try clearing npm cache: `npm cache clean --force`
- Check that the server JAR path is correct
- Look for error messages in the browser console

## Further Reading

- [Building MCP Servers](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/develop/build-server)
- [MCP Best Practices](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/develop/best-practices)
- [JSON-RPC 2.0](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification)

Commit message:

Fix JSON-RPC ID handling in MCP server responses
- Always include 'id' field in responses (even when null)
- Handle string, number, and null ID types correctly
- Fix ZodError validation issues in MCP Inspector
- Update README with JSON-RPC ID handling documentation
- Add troubleshooting entry for ID-related errors

Fixes compatibility with strict JSON-RPC 2.0 clients like MCP Inspector.

stage-2-mcp-server/README.md, after:

# Stage 2: MCP Server

## Overview

This stage introduces the **Model Context Protocol (MCP)**, a standardized protocol for connecting AI applications with external tools and data sources. You'll learn how to expose tools through MCP, making them accessible to any MCP-compatible client.

**Workshop Time**: 40 minutes (13:40-14:20)

## What You'll Learn

1. **MCP Protocol Fundamentals**
   - JSON-RPC 2.0 over STDIO
   - MCP initialization handshake
   - Tool discovery and execution
   - MCP message format

2. **Building an MCP Server**
   - Implementing the MCP protocol
   - Exposing tools via standard interface
   - Handling JSON-RPC requests
   - Returning structured responses

3. **Tool Integration**
   - Converting existing tools to MCP format
   - JSON schema for parameter validation
   - Error handling in MCP context

4. **Testing with MCP Clients**
   - Using the MCP Inspector
   - Integrating with Claude Desktop
   - Understanding client-server communication

## Key Concepts

### Model Context Protocol (MCP)

MCP is an open protocol that standardizes how applications provide context to Large Language Models (LLMs). It enables:

- **Interoperability**: Any MCP client can connect to any MCP server
- **Tool Discovery**: Clients can automatically discover available tools
- **Standardized Communication**: JSON-RPC 2.0 ensures consistent messaging
- **Type Safety**: JSON Schema validates tool parameters

### Architecture

```
┌─────────────────┐         JSON-RPC 2.0          ┌──────────────────┐
│   MCP Client    │◄──────── over STDIO ─────────►│   MCP Server     │
│  (Claude, etc)  │                                │  (Our Server)    │
└─────────────────┘                                └──────────────────┘
                                                            │
                                                            │ exposes
                                                            │
                                                            ▼
                                                   ┌──────────────────┐
                                                   │      Tools       │
                                                   │  - Weather       │
                                                   │  - Country Info  │
                                                   └──────────────────┘
```

### MCP Messages

**1. Initialize**
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": "1",
  "method": "initialize",
  "params": {
    "protocolVersion": "2024-11-05",
    "capabilities": {},
    "clientInfo": {
      "name": "example-client",
      "version": "1.0.0"
    }
  }
}
```

**2. List Tools**
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": "2",
  "method": "tools/list",
  "params": {}
}
```

**3. Call Tool**
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": "3",
  "method": "tools/call",
  "params": {
    "name": "weather",
    "arguments": {
      "city": "Paris"
    }
  }
}
```

## Project Structure

```
stage-2-mcp-server/
├── src/main/java/com/incept5/workshop/stage2/
│   ├── SimpleMCPServer.java     # MCP server implementation
│   ├── MCPDemo.java              # Demo application
│   └── tool/
│       ├── Tool.java             # Tool interface with JSON schema
│       ├── WeatherTool.java      # Weather tool implementation
│       └── CountryInfoTool.java  # Country info tool
├── pom.xml                       # Maven configuration
└── README.md                     # This file
```

## Running the Server

### Quick Start

```bash
# Build the project
cd stage-2-mcp-server
mvn clean package

# Run the server
java -jar target/stage-2-mcp-server.jar
```

### Testing with MCP Inspector

The MCP Inspector is a tool for testing MCP servers:

```bash
# Install and run the inspector (requires Node.js)
npx @modelcontextprotocol/inspector java -jar target/stage-2-mcp-server.jar
```

This will:
1. Start your MCP server
2. Open a web interface for testing
3. Allow you to call tools interactively

### Integrating with Claude Desktop

Add your server to Claude Desktop's configuration:

**macOS**: `~/Library/Application Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json`
**Windows**: `%APPDATA%\Claude\claude_desktop_config.json`

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "workshop-tools": {
      "command": "java",
      "args": [
        "-jar",
        "/absolute/path/to/stage-2-mcp-server.jar"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

Restart Claude Desktop, and your tools will be available!

## Implementation Details

### SimpleMCPServer

The server implements the core MCP protocol:

```java
public class SimpleMCPServer {
    private final Map<String, Tool> tools;
    
    // Registers tools
    public SimpleMCPServer() {
        registerTool(new WeatherTool());
        registerTool(new CountryInfoTool());
    }
    
    // Handles JSON-RPC requests
    private void handleRequest(String requestJson) {
        // Parse JSON-RPC request
        // Route to appropriate handler
        // Return JSON-RPC response
    }
    
    // Protocol methods
    private JsonObject handleInitialize(Object id, JsonObject params);
    private JsonObject handleToolsList(Object id);
    private JsonObject handleToolCall(Object id, JsonObject params);
}
```

### Tool Interface

Tools now include a JSON schema for parameter validation:

```java
public interface Tool {
    String getName();
    String getDescription();
    String getParameterSchema();  // New: JSON Schema for parameters
    String execute(Map<String, String> parameters) throws ToolExecutionException;
}
```

Example schema:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "city": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "Name of the city"
    }
  },
  "required": ["city"]
}
```

## Exercises

### Exercise 1: Test the Server (5 minutes)

1. Build and run the server
2. Use the MCP Inspector to test it
3. Call the weather tool for different cities
4. Call the country_info tool

### Exercise 2: Add a New Tool (15 minutes)

Create a calculator tool that performs basic math operations:

```java
public class CalculatorTool implements Tool {
    @Override
    public String getName() {
        return "calculator";
    }
    
    @Override
    public String getDescription() {
        return "Performs basic math operations (add, subtract, multiply, divide)";
    }
    
    @Override
    public String getParameterSchema() {
        return """
            {
              "type": "object",
              "properties": {
                "operation": {
                  "type": "string",
                  "enum": ["add", "subtract", "multiply", "divide"],
                  "description": "The operation to perform"
                },
                "a": {
                  "type": "number",
                  "description": "First number"
                },
                "b": {
                  "type": "number",
                  "description": "Second number"
                }
              },
              "required": ["operation", "a", "b"]
            }
            """;
    }
    
    @Override
    public String execute(Map<String, String> parameters) 
            throws ToolExecutionException {
        // Implement the calculator logic
        // Parse numbers and perform operation
        // Return result
    }
}
```

**Tasks**:
1. Implement the calculator tool
2. Register it in SimpleMCPServer
3. Test it with the MCP Inspector

### Exercise 3: Integrate with Claude Desktop (10 minutes)

1. Configure Claude Desktop with your server
2. Restart Claude
3. Ask Claude to:
   - Get weather for your city
   - Get information about your country
   - Use your calculator tool

### Exercise 4: Understanding the Protocol (10 minutes)

Read through SimpleMCPServer.java and answer:

1. How does the server parse incoming JSON-RPC requests?
2. What's the structure of a tool list response?
3. How are tool results formatted?
4. How does error handling work?

## Comparison with Stage 1

| Aspect | Stage 1 | Stage 2 |
|--------|---------|---------|
| **Protocol** | Custom XML-like format | Standard JSON-RPC 2.0 |
| **Transport** | Direct method calls | STDIO (stdin/stdout) |
| **Discovery** | Hardcoded in prompt | Dynamic via tools/list |
| **Interop** | Agent-specific | Any MCP client |
| **Validation** | Manual parsing | JSON Schema |

## Key Takeaways

1. **MCP standardizes tool integration** - Any MCP client can use your tools
2. **JSON-RPC 2.0 provides structure** - Clear request/response format
3. **STDIO enables process isolation** - Server runs in separate process
4. **JSON Schema validates inputs** - Type-safe parameter passing
5. **Tool discovery is dynamic** - Clients learn about tools at runtime

## Next Steps

In Stage 3, we'll add:
- **RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation)** - Using PostgreSQL with pgvector
- **Document processing** - Chunking and embedding
- **Vector search** - Similarity-based retrieval

## Resources

- [MCP Specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs)
- [MCP Java SDK](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/java-sdk)
- [MCP Inspector](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/inspector)
- [Claude Desktop](https://claude.ai/download)
- [JSON-RPC 2.0 Specification](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification)
- [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/)

## Important: STDIO and Logging

### Critical Configuration

When using MCP over STDIO transport, **all logging MUST go to stderr, not stdout**. This is because:

1. **STDOUT is reserved for JSON-RPC messages** - The MCP protocol expects clean JSON on stdout
2. **Any non-JSON output breaks the protocol** - Log messages on stdout cause parse errors
3. **STDERR is for diagnostics** - All logging, errors, and debug output goes here

Our `logback.xml` configuration ensures this:

```xml
<appender name="STDERR" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
    <target>System.err</target>  <!-- ALL logs go to STDERR -->
    <encoder>
        <pattern>%d{HH:mm:ss.SSS} [%thread] %-5level %logger{36} - %msg%n</pattern>
    </encoder>
</appender>
```

**Common Error**: If you see errors like "Unexpected non-whitespace character after JSON", it means something is writing to stdout. Check:
- System.out.println() calls (remove or redirect to stderr)
- Logger configuration (must target stderr)
- Third-party libraries that may log to stdout

### NDJSON Format

MCP over STDIO uses **Newline Delimited JSON (NDJSON)**:
- Each JSON-RPC message must be on a single line
- Messages are separated by newlines
- No pretty-printing or multi-line formatting

This is why we use `new Gson()` instead of `new GsonBuilder().setPrettyPrinting().create()`.

### JSON-RPC 2.0 ID Handling

JSON-RPC 2.0 requires that the `id` field be present in all responses (both success and error), matching the `id` from the request:

- **Request ID present**: Response includes the same `id` (string or number)
- **Request ID is null**: Response includes `"id": null`
- **Request has no ID (notification)**: No response is sent

Our implementation handles all three cases correctly:

```java
// ID must always be present in response, matching request ID
if (id == null) {
    response.add("id", gson.toJsonTree(null));  // Explicit null
} else if (id instanceof Number) {
    response.add("id", gson.toJsonTree(id));     // Preserve number type
} else {
    response.addProperty("id", id.toString());    // String ID
}
```

This ensures compatibility with strict JSON-RPC clients like the MCP Inspector.

## Troubleshooting

### Server won't start
- Check Java version (requires Java 21+)
- Verify the JAR was built: `mvn clean package`
- Check for port conflicts if using HTTP transport

### JSON parse errors in MCP Inspector
- **"Unexpected token '}'"** - Pretty-printing is enabled (should use compact JSON)
- **"Unexpected non-whitespace character"** - Logging is going to stdout (should go to stderr)
- **"Unexpected end of JSON"** - Incomplete JSON message (check for truncation)
- **"ZodError: Invalid input" with missing 'id' field** - Fixed in v1.0.1: JSON-RPC responses now always include the `id` field, even when null, to comply with the JSON-RPC 2.0 specification

### Tools not appearing in Claude
- Verify the config file path
- Check JSON syntax in claude_desktop_config.json
- Restart Claude Desktop completely
- Check Claude Desktop logs

### Tool execution fails
- Verify parameter names match the schema
- Check for network issues (weather/country APIs)
- Look at server logs (on stderr!) for detailed errors

### MCP Inspector issues
- Ensure Node.js is installed
- Try clearing npm cache: `npm cache clean --force`
- Check that the server JAR path is correct
- Look for error messages in the browser console

## Further Reading

- [Building MCP Servers](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/develop/build-server)
- [MCP Best Practices](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/develop/best-practices)
- [JSON-RPC 2.0](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification)
